# AutismCordBloodExpression
Analysis of gene expression in umbilical cord blood from ASD, Non-TD, and TD subjects in the MARBLES and EARLI studies.

## Article: A meta-analysis of two enriched-risk prospective studies reveals autism-specific transcriptional changes to chromatin, autoimmune, and environmental response genes in umbilical cord blood 
#### Mordaunt CE, Park BY, Bakulski KM, Feinberg JI, Croen LA, Ladd-Acosta C, Newschaffer C, Volk HE, Ozonoff S, Hertz-Picciotto I, LaSalle JM, Schmidt RJ, and Fallin DM.

***Background:*** Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that affects more than 1% of children in the United States. ASD risk is thought to arise from a combination of genetic and environmental factors, with the perinatal period as a critical window. Understanding early transcriptomic changes in ASD would assist in understanding disease pathogenesis and identifying biomarkers and treatments for ASD. However, little is known about umbilical cord blood gene expression profiles in ASD compared to non-typically developing (Non-TD) or neurotypical children. 

***Methods:*** Genome-wide transcript levels were measured by Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 array in umbilical cord blood samples from both the Early Autism Risk Longitudinal Investigation (EARLI) and the Markers of Autism Risk in Babies--Learning Early Signs (MARBLES) studies, which are enriched-risk pregnancy cohorts of mothers with a child previously diagnosed with ASD. An algorithm-based child diagnosis was based on 36 month assessments, categorized as either ASD, typical development (TD), or not ASD but non-typical (Non-TD). RNA from a total of 59 ASD, 92 Non-TD, and 120 TD subjects were included and differences were analyzed by comparing ASD versus TD subjects, with Non-TD versus TD as a specificity control. Meta-analysis was used to combine the results from both studies. Functional, chromosomal, and evolutionary enrichments of differentially expressed genes were also examined across diagnostic groups. 

***Results:*** While cord blood gene expression differences comparing either ASD or Non-TD to TD did not reach genome-wide significance when adjusting for multiple comparisons, 172 genes were differentially-expressed with nominal significance between ASD and TD cord blood (log<sub>2</sub>(fold change) > 0.1, *p* < 0.01). Genes differentially expressed in the ASD versus TD comparison were significantly enriched for toxic substance response and xenobiotic metabolism functions, and gene sets involved in chromatin regulation and systemic lupus erythematosus were significantly upregulated (FDR *q* < 0.05). In contrast, a predominantly unique set of 66 genes were nominally differentially expressed between Non-TD and TD cord blood, including only 8 genes also differentially expressed in ASD.

***Conclusions:*** This is the first study to identify perinatal gene expression differences in umbilical cord blood specific to ASD. The results of this meta-analysis across two prospective ASD cohorts provide nominal evidence for environmental, immune, and epigenetic mechanisms in ASD etiology.
